CHAPTER I

      “Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
      Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war, if
      you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
      Antichrist—I really believe he is Antichrist—I will have
      nothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my
      ‘faithful slave,’ as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have
      frightened you—sit down and tell me all the news.”

      It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pávlovna
      Schérer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Márya Fëdorovna. With
      these words she greeted Prince Vasíli Kurágin, a man of high rank and
      importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pávlovna
      had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la
      grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by
      the elite.

      All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered by
      a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:

      “If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the prospect
      of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible, I shall be
      very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10—Annette Schérer.”

      “Heavens! what a virulent attack!” replied the prince, not in the least
      disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
      embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on his
      breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that refined
      French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and with the
      gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance who had
      grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pávlovna, kissed her
      hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head, and
      complacently seated himself on the sofa.

      “First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend’s mind at
      rest,” said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness and
      affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be discerned.

      “Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like
      these if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pávlovna. “You are staying the
      whole evening, I hope?”

      “And the fete at the English ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I must put
      in an appearance there,” said the prince. “My daughter is coming for me to
      take me there.”

      “I thought today’s fete had been canceled. I confess all these festivities
      and fireworks are becoming wearisome.”

      “If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been
      put off,” said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
      said things he did not even wish to be believed.

      “Don’t tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosíltsev’s
      dispatch? You know everything.”

      “What can one say about it?” replied the prince in a cold, listless tone.
      “What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has burnt his
      boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours.”

      Prince Vasíli always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale
      part. Anna Pávlovna Schérer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
      overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
      become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feel like
      it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the expectations of
      those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it did not suit her
      faded features, always played round her lips expressed, as in a spoiled
      child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect, which she neither
      wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to correct.

      In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pávlovna burst
      out:

      “Oh, don’t speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don’t understand things, but
      Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is betraying us!
      Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high
      vocation and will be true to it. That is the one thing I have faith in!
      Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform the noblest role on earth,
      and he is so virtuous and noble that God will not forsake him. He will
      fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of revolution, which has become
      more terrible than ever in the person of this murderer and villain! We
      alone must avenge the blood of the just one.... Whom, I ask you, can we
      rely on?... England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot
      understand the Emperor Alexander’s loftiness of soul. She has refused to
      evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and still seeks, some secret motive in
      our actions. What answer did Novosíltsev get? None. The English have not
      understood and cannot understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who
      wants nothing for himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what
      have they promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will
      not perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible,
      and that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don’t believe a word
      that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality
      is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our
      adored monarch. He will save Europe!”

      She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

      “I think,” said the prince with a smile, “that if you had been sent
      instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of
      Prussia’s consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a cup
      of tea?”

      “In a moment. À propos,” she added, becoming calm again, “I am
      expecting two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who
      is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
      French families. He is one of the genuine émigrés, the good ones.
      And also the Abbé Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
      received by the Emperor. Had you heard?”

      “I shall be delighted to meet them,” said the prince. “But tell me,” he
      added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,
      though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his visit,
      “is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be appointed
      first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor creature.”

      Prince Vasíli wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
      trying through the Dowager Empress Márya Fëdorovna to secure it for the
      baron.

      Anna Pávlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
      anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
      pleased with.

      “Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,”
       was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.

      As she named the Empress, Anna Pávlovna’s face suddenly assumed an
      expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
      sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
      patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup
      d’estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.

      The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
      courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pávlovna wished both
      to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man recommended to
      the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she said:

      “Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out
      everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly beautiful.”

      The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

      “I often think,” she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer to the
      prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and social
      topics were ended and the time had come for intimate conversation—“I
      often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are distributed. Why
      has fate given you two such splendid children? I don’t speak of Anatole,
      your youngest. I don’t like him,” she added in a tone admitting of no
      rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. “Two such charming children. And
      really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you don’t deserve to
      have them.”

      And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

      “I can’t help it,” said the prince. “Lavater would have said I lack the
      bump of paternity.”

      “Don’t joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am
      dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves” (and her face
      assumed its melancholy expression), “he was mentioned at Her Majesty’s and
      you were pitied....”

      The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly, awaiting
      a reply. He frowned.

      “What would you have me do?” he said at last. “You know I did all a father
      could for their education, and they have both turned out fools. Hippolyte
      is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That is the only
      difference between them.” He said this smiling in a way more natural and
      animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly
      revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.

      “And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father
      there would be nothing I could reproach you with,” said Anna Pávlovna,
      looking up pensively.

      “I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my children
      are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That is how I
      explain it to myself. It can’t be helped!”

      He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture.
      Anna Pávlovna meditated.

      “Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?” she asked.
      “They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I don’t feel
      that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is very unhappy
      with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary Bolkónskaya.”

      Prince Vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
      perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of the
      head that he was considering this information.

      “Do you know,” he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad current
      of his thoughts, “that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year?
      And,” he went on after a pause, “what will it be in five years, if he goes
      on like this?” Presently he added: “That’s what we fathers have to put up
      with.... Is this princess of yours rich?”

      “Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the
      well-known Prince Bolkónski who had to retire from the army under the late
      Emperor, and was nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He is very clever but
      eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a brother; I
      think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp
      of Kutúzov’s and will be here tonight.”

      “Listen, dear Annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pávlovna’s
      hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. “Arrange that affair for me
      and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f,
      as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good
      family and that’s all I want.”

      And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
      maid of honor’s hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as he
      lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.

      “Attendez,” said Anna Pávlovna, reflecting, “I’ll speak to Lise,
      young Bolkónski’s wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can be
      arranged. It shall be on your family’s behalf that I’ll start my
      apprenticeship as old maid.”

      CHAPTER II

      Anna Pávlovna’s drawing room was gradually filling. The highest Petersburg
      society was assembled there: people differing widely in age and character
      but alike in the social circle to which they belonged. Prince Vasíli’s
      daughter, the beautiful Hélène, came to take her father to the
      ambassador’s entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her badge as maid of
      honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkónskaya, known as la femme la
      plus séduisante de Pétersbourg, * was also there. She had been married
      during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to any large
      gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasíli’s son, Hippolyte,
      had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbé Morio and many
      others had also come.

* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.

      To each new arrival Anna Pávlovna said, “You have not yet seen my aunt,”
       or “You do not know my aunt?” and very gravely conducted him or her to a
      little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
      sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive; and
      slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pávlovna
      mentioned each one’s name and then left them.

      Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not one
      of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them cared
      about; Anna Pávlovna observed these greetings with mournful and solemn
      interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in the same
      words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her Majesty,
      “who, thank God, was better today.” And each visitor, though politeness
      prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with a sense of
      relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the
      whole evening.

      The young Princess Bolkónskaya had brought some work in a gold-embroidered
      velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicate dark down was
      just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but it lifted all the more
      sweetly, and was especially charming when she occasionally drew it down to
      meet the lower lip. As is always the case with a thoroughly attractive
      woman, her defect—the shortness of her upper lip and her half-open
      mouth—seemed to be her own special and peculiar form of beauty.
      Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty young woman, so soon to
      become a mother, so full of life and health, and carrying her burden so
      lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones who looked at her, after
      being in her company and talking to her a little while, felt as if they
      too were becoming, like her, full of life and health. All who talked to
      her, and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of her
      white teeth, thought that they were in a specially amiable mood that day.

      The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying steps,
      her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat down on a
      sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a pleasure to
      herself and to all around her. “I have brought my work,” said she in
      French, displaying her bag and addressing all present. “Mind, Annette, I
      hope you have not played a wicked trick on me,” she added, turning to her
      hostess. “You wrote that it was to be quite a small reception, and just
      see how badly I am dressed.” And she spread out her arms to show her
      short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress, girdled with a broad
      ribbon just below the breast.

      “Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone
      else,” replied Anna Pávlovna.

      “You know,” said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
      French, turning to a general, “my husband is deserting me? He is going to
      get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?” she added,
      addressing Prince Vasíli, and without waiting for an answer she turned to
      speak to his daughter, the beautiful Hélène.

      “What a delightful woman this little princess is!” said Prince Vasíli to
      Anna Pávlovna.

      One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
      close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable at
      that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout young
      man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezúkhov, a well-known grandee of
      Catherine’s time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man had not yet
      entered either the military or civil service, as he had only just returned
      from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his first appearance
      in society. Anna Pávlovna greeted him with the nod she accorded to the
      lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of this lowest-grade
      greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight of something too
      large and unsuited to the place, came over her face when she saw Pierre
      enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than the other men in the
      room, her anxiety could only have reference to the clever though shy, but
      observant and natural, expression which distinguished him from everyone
      else in that drawing room.

      “It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
      invalid,” said Anna Pávlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt
      as she conducted him to her.

      Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as
      if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
      princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.

      Anna Pávlovna’s alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the aunt
      without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty’s health. Anna
      Pávlovna in dismay detained him with the words: “Do you know the Abbé
      Morio? He is a most interesting man.”

      “Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
      interesting but hardly feasible.”

      “You think so?” rejoined Anna Pávlovna in order to say something and get
      away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed a
      reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had
      finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
      wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart, he
      began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbé’s plan chimerical.

      “We will talk of it later,” said Anna Pávlovna with a smile.

      And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
      resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready to
      help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As the
      foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes round
      and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that creaks or
      makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the machine or set
      it in proper motion, so Anna Pávlovna moved about her drawing room,
      approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a word or slight
      rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady, proper, and
      regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident.
      She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached the group round
      Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and again when he passed
      to another group whose center was the abbé.

      Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pávlovna’s was
      the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the intellectual
      lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a child in a toyshop,
      did not know which way to look, afraid of missing any clever conversation
      that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident and refined expression on
      the faces of those present he was always expecting to hear something very
      profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here the conversation seemed
      interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity to express his own
      views, as young people are fond of doing.

      CHAPTER III

      Anna Pávlovna’s reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed steadily
      and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt, beside whom
      sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face was rather out
      of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had settled into
      three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round the abbé. Another,
      of young people, was grouped round the beautiful Princess Hélène, Prince
      Vasíli’s daughter, and the little Princess Bolkónskaya, very pretty and
      rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The third group was gathered
      round Mortemart and Anna Pávlovna.

      The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
      manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
      politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in which
      he found himself. Anna Pávlovna was obviously serving him up as a treat to
      her guests. As a clever maître d’hôtel serves up as a specially choice
      delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the kitchen would
      have cared to eat, so Anna Pávlovna served up to her guests, first the
      vicomte and then the abbé, as peculiarly choice morsels. The group about
      Mortemart immediately began discussing the murder of the Duc d’Enghien.
      The vicomte said that the Duc d’Enghien had perished by his own
      magnanimity, and that there were particular reasons for Buonaparte’s
      hatred of him.

      “Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte,” said Anna Pávlovna, with a
      pleasant feeling that there was something à la Louis XV in the
      sound of that sentence: “Contez nous çela, Vicomte.”

      The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
      comply. Anna Pávlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
      listen to his tale.

      “The vicomte knew the duc personally,” whispered Anna Pávlovna to one of
      the guests. “The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur,” said she to another.
      “How evidently he belongs to the best society,” said she to a third; and
      the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most
      advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot
      dish.

      The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.

      “Come over here, Hélène, dear,” said Anna Pávlovna to the beautiful young
      princess who was sitting some way off, the center of another group.

      The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which
      she had first entered the room—the smile of a perfectly beautiful
      woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss and ivy,
      with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling diamonds, she
      passed between the men who made way for her, not looking at any of them
      but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the privilege of
      admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders, back, and bosom—which
      in the fashion of those days were very much exposed—and she seemed
      to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as she moved toward Anna
      Pávlovna. Hélène was so lovely that not only did she not show any trace of
      coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared shy of her unquestionable
      and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wish, but to be unable, to
      diminish its effect.

      “How lovely!” said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
      shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
      when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
      unchanging smile.

      “Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience,” said he, smilingly
      inclining his head.

      The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered a
      reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was being
      told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm, altered in
      shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more beautiful bosom,
      on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time to time she smoothed
      the folds of her dress, and whenever the story produced an effect she
      glanced at Anna Pávlovna, at once adopted just the expression she saw on
      the maid of honor’s face, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.

      The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Hélène.

      “Wait a moment, I’ll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking of?”
       she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. “Fetch me my workbag.”

      There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking merrily
      to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her seat.

      “Now I am all right,” she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she took
      up her work.

      Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and moving
      a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.

      Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary
      resemblance to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in
      spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like
      his sister’s, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
      self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
      wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary was
      dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self-confidence,
      while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth all seemed
      puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms and legs always fell
      into unnatural positions.

      “It’s not going to be a ghost story?” said he, sitting down beside the
      princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
      instrument he could not begin to speak.

      “Why no, my dear fellow,” said the astonished narrator, shrugging his
      shoulders.

      “Because I hate ghost stories,” said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which
      showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had
      uttered them.

      He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
      whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in a
      dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
      effrayée, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.

      The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,
      to the effect that the Duc d’Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visit
      Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also
      enjoyed the famous actress’ favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
      happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,
      and was thus at the duc’s mercy. The latter spared him, and this
      magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.

      The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point where
      the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
      agitated.

      “Charming!” said Anna Pávlovna with an inquiring glance at the little
      princess.

      “Charming!” whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her
      work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
      prevented her from going on with it.

      The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully prepared
      to continue, but just then Anna Pávlovna, who had kept a watchful eye on
      the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was talking too loudly
      and vehemently with the abbé, so she hurried to the rescue. Pierre had
      managed to start a conversation with the abbé about the balance of power,
      and the latter, evidently interested by the young man’s simple-minded
      eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both were talking and listening
      too eagerly and too naturally, which was why Anna Pávlovna disapproved.

      “The means are ... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the
      people,” the abbé was saying. “It is only necessary for one powerful
      nation like Russia—barbaric as she is said to be—to place
      herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object
      the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
      world!”

      “But how are you to get that balance?” Pierre was beginning.

      At that moment Anna Pávlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,
      asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian’s face
      instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary expression,
      evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.

      “I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
      society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had the
      honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of the
      climate,” said he.

      Not letting the abbé and Pierre escape, Anna Pávlovna, the more
      conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the larger
      circle.

      CHAPTER IV

      Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
      Bolkónski, the little princess’ husband. He was a very handsome young man,
      of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about him, from
      his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step, offered a most
      striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was evident that he not
      only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had found them to be so
      tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to them. And among all
      these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed to bore him so much as
      that of his pretty wife. He turned away from her with a grimace that
      distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pávlovna’s hand, and screwing up
      his eyes scanned the whole company.

      “You are off to the war, Prince?” said Anna Pávlovna.

      “General Kutúzov,” said Bolkónski, speaking French and stressing the last
      syllable of the general’s name like a Frenchman, “has been pleased to take
      me as an aide-de-camp....”

      “And Lise, your wife?”

      “She will go to the country.”

      “Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?”

      “André,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
      coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, “the vicomte has been
      telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!”

      Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from the
      moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
      affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
      Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
      touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre’s beaming face he gave him an
      unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.

      “There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?” said he to Pierre.

      “I knew you would be here,” replied Pierre. “I will come to supper with
      you. May I?” he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte who
      was continuing his story.

      “No, impossible!” said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre’s hand
      to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to say
      something more, but at that moment Prince Vasíli and his daughter got up
      to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.

      “You must excuse me, dear Vicomte,” said Prince Vasíli to the Frenchman,
      holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising.
      “This unfortunate fete at the ambassador’s deprives me of a pleasure, and
      obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your enchanting
      party,” said he, turning to Anna Pávlovna.

      His daughter, Princess Hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly holding
      up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more radiantly on her
      beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous, almost frightened,
      eyes as she passed him.

      “Very lovely,” said Prince Andrew.

      “Very,” said Pierre.

      In passing Prince Vasíli seized Pierre’s hand and said to Anna Pávlovna:
      “Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month and
      this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is so necessary
      for a young man as the society of clever women.”

      Anna Pávlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
      father to be a connection of Prince Vasíli’s. The elderly lady who had
      been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasíli
      in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had left
      her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and fear.

      “How about my son Borís, Prince?” said she, hurrying after him into the
      anteroom. “I can’t remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news I
      may take back to my poor boy.”

      Although Prince Vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely to the
      elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an ingratiating
      and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go away.

      “What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would be
      transferred to the Guards at once?” said she.

      “Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can,” answered Prince
      Vasíli, “but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise
      you to appeal to Rumyántsev through Prince Golítsyn. That would be the
      best way.”

      The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskáya, belonging to one of the best
      families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of society
      had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
      Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son. It
      was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasíli that she had obtained an
      invitation to Anna Pávlovna’s reception and had sat listening to the
      vicomte’s story. Prince Vasíli’s words frightened her, an embittered look
      clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then she smiled
      again and clutched Prince Vasíli’s arm more tightly.

      “Listen to me, Prince,” said she. “I have never yet asked you for anything
      and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my father’s
      friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God’s sake to do this for my
      son—and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,” she added
      hurriedly. “No, don’t be angry, but promise! I have asked Golítsyn and he
      has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were,” she said, trying to
      smile though tears were in her eyes.

      “Papa, we shall be late,” said Princess Hélène, turning her beautiful head
      and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood waiting by
      the door.

      Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized if
      it is to last. Prince Vasíli knew this, and having once realized that if
      he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unable to
      ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But in Princess
      Drubetskáya’s case he felt, after her second appeal, something like qualms
      of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true; he had been
      indebted to her father for the first steps in his career. Moreover, he
      could see by her manners that she was one of those women—mostly
      mothers—who, having once made up their minds, will not rest until
      they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary to go on
      insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes. This
      last consideration moved him.

      “My dear Anna Mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
      weariness of tone, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask; but
      to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father’s memory, I will
      do the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the Guards. Here
      is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?”

      “My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you—I knew your
      kindness!” He turned to go.

      “Wait—just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards...”
       she faltered. “You are on good terms with Michael Ilariónovich Kutúzov ...
      recommend Borís to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and then...”

      Prince Vasíli smiled.

      “No, I won’t promise that. You don’t know how Kutúzov is pestered since
      his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the
      Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants.”

      “No, but do promise! I won’t let you go! My dear benefactor...”

      “Papa,” said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, “we shall
      be late.”

      “Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?”

      “Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?”

      “Certainly; but about Kutúzov, I don’t promise.”

      “Do promise, do promise, Vasíli!” cried Anna Mikháylovna as he went, with
      the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came naturally
      to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.

      Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all
      the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed
      its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the group where
      the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to listen, while
      waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was accomplished.

      CHAPTER V

      “And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?”
       asked Anna Pávlovna, “and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Lucca
      laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur Buonaparte
      sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations? Adorable!
      It is enough to make one’s head whirl! It is as if the whole world had
      gone crazy.”

      Prince Andrew looked Anna Pávlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic
      smile.

      “‘Dieu me la donne, gare à qui la touche!’’ * They say he was very
      fine when he said that,” he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: “‘Dio
      mi l’ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!’’

     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!

      “I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over,”
       Anna Pávlovna continued. “The sovereigns will not be able to endure this
      man who is a menace to everything.”

      “The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia,” said the vicomte, polite but
      hopeless: “The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,
      for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!” and he became more
      animated. “And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal
      of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors to
      compliment the usurper.”

      And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.

      Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time through
      his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the little
      princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condé coat of
      arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity as if she
      had asked him to do it.

      “Bâton de gueules, engrêlé de gueules d’azur—maison Condé,”
      said he.

      The princess listened, smiling.

      “If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer,” the vicomte
      continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which he is better
      acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but follows the
      current of his own thoughts, “things will have gone too far. By intrigues,
      violence, exile, and executions, French society—I mean good French
      society—will have been forever destroyed, and then....”

      He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to make
      a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pávlovna, who had
      him under observation, interrupted:

      “The Emperor Alexander,” said she, with the melancholy which always
      accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, “has declared
      that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their own
      form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper, the
      whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its rightful
      king,” she concluded, trying to be amiable to the royalist emigrant.

      “That is doubtful,” said Prince Andrew. “Monsieur le Vicomte quite rightly
      supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will be
      difficult to return to the old regime.”

      “From what I have heard,” said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the
      conversation, “almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
      Bonaparte’s side.”

      “It is the Buonapartists who say that,” replied the vicomte without
      looking at Pierre. “At the present time it is difficult to know the real
      state of French public opinion.”

      “Bonaparte has said so,” remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.

      It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his remarks
      at him, though without looking at him.

      “‘I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,’” Prince
      Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon’s words.
      “‘I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.’ I do not know how far he
      was justified in saying so.”

      “Not in the least,” replied the vicomte. “After the murder of the duc even
      the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some people,” he
      went on, turning to Anna Pávlovna, “he ever was a hero, after the murder
      of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one hero less on
      earth.”

      Before Anna Pávlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation
      of the vicomte’s epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, and
      though Anna Pávlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, she
      was unable to stop him.

      “The execution of the Duc d’Enghien,” declared Monsieur Pierre, “was a
      political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness of
      soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of that
      deed.”

      “Dieu! Mon Dieu!” muttered Anna Pávlovna in a terrified whisper.

      “What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
      greatness of soul?” said the little princess, smiling and drawing her work
      nearer to her.

      “Oh! Oh!” exclaimed several voices.

      “Capital!” said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee
      with the palm of his hand.

      The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
      audience over his spectacles and continued.

      “I say so,” he continued desperately, “because the Bourbons fled from the
      Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone understood
      the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good, he could not
      stop short for the sake of one man’s life.”

      “Won’t you come over to the other table?” suggested Anna Pávlovna.

      But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

      “No,” cried he, becoming more and more eager, “Napoleon is great because
      he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
      that was good in it—equality of citizenship and freedom of speech
      and of the press—and only for that reason did he obtain power.”

      “Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit
      murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him a
      great man,” remarked the vicomte.

      “He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid
      them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
      Revolution was a grand thing!” continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by
      this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish
      to express all that was in his mind.

      “What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But
      won’t you come to this other table?” repeated Anna Pávlovna.

      “Rousseau’s Contrat Social,” said the vicomte with a tolerant
      smile.

      “I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas.”

      “Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide,” again interjected an
      ironical voice.

      “Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.
      What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices, and
      equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained in full
      force.”

      “Liberty and equality,” said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last
      deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,
      “high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not love
      liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality. Have
      people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We wanted
      liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it.”

      Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the vicomte
      and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of Pierre’s
      outburst Anna Pávlovna, despite her social experience, was horror-struck.
      But when she saw that Pierre’s sacrilegious words had not exasperated the
      vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him, she
      rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the
      orator.

      “But, my dear Monsieur Pierre,” said she, “how do you explain the fact of
      a great man executing a duc—or even an ordinary man who—is
      innocent and untried?”

      “I should like,” said the vicomte, “to ask how monsieur explains the 18th
      Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at all like
      the conduct of a great man!”

      “And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!” said the
      little princess, shrugging her shoulders.

      “He’s a low fellow, say what you will,” remarked Prince Hippolyte.

      Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His
      smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled, his
      grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another—a
      childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to ask
      forgiveness.

      The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this
      young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were silent.

      “How do you expect him to answer you all at once?” said Prince Andrew.
      “Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between his
      acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So it seems to
      me.”

      “Yes, yes, of course!” Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this
      reinforcement.

      “One must admit,” continued Prince Andrew, “that Napoleon as a man was
      great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he gave
      his hand to the plague-stricken; but ... but there are other acts which it
      is difficult to justify.”

      Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
      Pierre’s remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go.

      Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,
      and asking them all to be seated began:

      “I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it. Excuse
      me, Vicomte—I must tell it in Russian or the point will be lost....”
       And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian as a
      Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia. Everyone
      waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his
      story.

      “There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She
      must have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
      taste. And she had a lady’s maid, also big. She said....”

      Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with
      difficulty.

      “She said.... Oh yes! She said, ‘Girl,’ to the maid, ‘put on a livery, get
      up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.’”

      Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his
      audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
      persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pávlovna, did however smile.

      “She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and her
      long hair came down....” Here he could contain himself no longer and went
      on, between gasps of laughter: “And the whole world knew....”

      And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told
      it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pávlovna and the
      others appreciated Prince Hippolyte’s social tact in so agreeably ending
      Pierre’s unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the
      conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and
      next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
      where.
