CHAPTER I

      “Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
      Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war, if
      you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
      Antichrist—I really believe he is Antichrist—I will have
      nothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my
      ‘faithful slave,’ as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have
      frightened you—sit down and tell me all the news.”

      It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pávlovna
      Schérer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Márya Fëdorovna. With
      these words she greeted Prince Vasíli Kurágin, a man of high rank and
      importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pávlovna
      had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la
      grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by
      the elite.

      All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered by
      a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:

      “If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the prospect
      of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible, I shall be
      very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10—Annette Schérer.”

      “Heavens! what a virulent attack!” replied the prince, not in the least
      disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
      embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on his
      breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that refined
      French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and with the
      gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance who had
      grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pávlovna, kissed her
      hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head, and
      complacently seated himself on the sofa.

      “First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend’s mind at
      rest,” said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness and
      affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be discerned.

      “Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like
      these if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pávlovna. “You are staying the
      whole evening, I hope?”

      “And the fete at the English ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I must put
      in an appearance there,” said the prince. “My daughter is coming for me to
      take me there.”

      “I thought today’s fete had been canceled. I confess all these festivities
      and fireworks are becoming wearisome.”

      “If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been
      put off,” said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
      said things he did not even wish to be believed.

      “Don’t tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosíltsev’s
      dispatch? You know everything.”

      “What can one say about it?” replied the prince in a cold, listless tone.
      “What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has burnt his
      boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours.”

      Prince Vasíli always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale
      part. Anna Pávlovna Schérer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
      overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
      become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feel like
      it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the expectations of
      those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it did not suit her
      faded features, always played round her lips expressed, as in a spoiled
      child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect, which she neither
      wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to correct.

      In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pávlovna burst
      out:

      “Oh, don’t speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don’t understand things, but
      Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is betraying us!
      Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high
      vocation and will be true to it. That is the one thing I have faith in!
      Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform the noblest role on earth,
      and he is so virtuous and noble that God will not forsake him. He will
      fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of revolution, which has become
      more terrible than ever in the person of this murderer and villain! We
      alone must avenge the blood of the just one.... Whom, I ask you, can we
      rely on?... England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot
      understand the Emperor Alexander’s loftiness of soul. She has refused to
      evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and still seeks, some secret motive in
      our actions. What answer did Novosíltsev get? None. The English have not
      understood and cannot understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who
      wants nothing for himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what
      have they promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will
      not perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible,
      and that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don’t believe a word
      that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality
      is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our
      adored monarch. He will save Europe!”

      She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

      “I think,” said the prince with a smile, “that if you had been sent
      instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of
      Prussia’s consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a cup
      of tea?”

      “In a moment. À propos,” she added, becoming calm again, “I am
      expecting two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who
      is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
      French families. He is one of the genuine émigrés, the good ones.
      And also the Abbé Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
      received by the Emperor. Had you heard?”

      “I shall be delighted to meet them,” said the prince. “But tell me,” he
      added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,
      though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his visit,
      “is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be appointed
      first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor creature.”

      Prince Vasíli wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
      trying through the Dowager Empress Márya Fëdorovna to secure it for the
      baron.

      Anna Pávlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
      anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
      pleased with.

      “Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,”
       was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.

      As she named the Empress, Anna Pávlovna’s face suddenly assumed an
      expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
      sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
      patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup
      d’estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.

      The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
      courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pávlovna wished both
      to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man recommended to
      the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she said:

      “Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out
      everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly beautiful.”

      The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

      “I often think,” she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer to the
      prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and social
      topics were ended and the time had come for intimate conversation—“I
      often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are distributed. Why
      has fate given you two such splendid children? I don’t speak of Anatole,
      your youngest. I don’t like him,” she added in a tone admitting of no
      rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. “Two such charming children. And
      really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you don’t deserve to
      have them.”

      And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

      “I can’t help it,” said the prince. “Lavater would have said I lack the
      bump of paternity.”

      “Don’t joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am
      dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves” (and her face
      assumed its melancholy expression), “he was mentioned at Her Majesty’s and
      you were pitied....”

      The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly, awaiting
      a reply. He frowned.

      “What would you have me do?” he said at last. “You know I did all a father
      could for their education, and they have both turned out fools. Hippolyte
      is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That is the only
      difference between them.” He said this smiling in a way more natural and
      animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly
      revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.

      “And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father
      there would be nothing I could reproach you with,” said Anna Pávlovna,
      looking up pensively.

      “I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my children
      are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That is how I
      explain it to myself. It can’t be helped!”

      He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture.
      Anna Pávlovna meditated.

      “Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?” she asked.
      “They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I don’t feel
      that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is very unhappy
      with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary Bolkónskaya.”

      Prince Vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
      perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of the
      head that he was considering this information.

      “Do you know,” he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad current
      of his thoughts, “that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year?
      And,” he went on after a pause, “what will it be in five years, if he goes
      on like this?” Presently he added: “That’s what we fathers have to put up
      with.... Is this princess of yours rich?”

      “Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the
      well-known Prince Bolkónski who had to retire from the army under the late
      Emperor, and was nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He is very clever but
      eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a brother; I
      think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp
      of Kutúzov’s and will be here tonight.”

      “Listen, dear Annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pávlovna’s
      hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. “Arrange that affair for me
      and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f,
      as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good
      family and that’s all I want.”

      And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
      maid of honor’s hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as he
      lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.

      “Attendez,” said Anna Pávlovna, reflecting, “I’ll speak to Lise,
      young Bolkónski’s wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can be
      arranged. It shall be on your family’s behalf that I’ll start my
      apprenticeship as old maid.”
